so when people voiced fears of
artificial intelligence very often
they invoke images of humanoid robots
run amok you know terminator you know
that might be something to consider but
that's the distant threat or we fret
about digital surveillance with
metaphors from the past 1984 jor-el
Orwell's 1984 it's hitting the
bestseller lists again it's a great book
but it's not the correct dystopia for
the 21st century well we need to fear
most is not what artificial intelligence
will do to us on its own but how the
people in power will use artificial
intelligence to control us and to
manipulate us in novel sometimes hidden
subtle and unexpected ways much of the
technology that threatens our freedom
and our dignity in the near term future
is being developed by companies in the
business of capturing and selling our
data and our attention to advertisers
and others Facebook Google Amazon
Alibaba
tensa now artificial intelligence has
started bolstering their business as
well
and it may seem like artificial
intelligence is just the next thing
after online ads it's not it's a jump in
category it's a whole different world
and it has great potential it could
accelerate our understanding of many
areas of study and research at the
paraphrase a famous Hollywood
philosopher with prodigious potential
come prodigious risk now let's look at a
basic fact of our digital lives online
ads right we kind of dismissed them they
exceed Croods ineffective we've all had
the experience of being followed on the
web
a why an ad based on something we
searched I read you know you look up a
pair of boots and for a week those boots
are following you around everywhere you
go even after you succumb and buy them
they're still following you around we're
kind of inure to that kind of basic
cheap manipulation we were all our eyes
and we think you know what these things
don't work except online the digital
technologies are not just ads now to
understand that let's think of a
physical world example you know how at
the checkout counters near supermarkets
near the cashier there's candy and gum
at the eye level of kids now that's
designed to make them whine at their
parents just as the parents about to
sort of check out now that's a
persuasion architecture it's not nice
but it kind of works that's why you see
it in every supermarket now in the
physical world such persuasion
architectures are kind of limited
because you can only put so many things
by the cashier right and the candy and
gum it's the same for everyone even
though it mostly works only for people
who have whiny little humans beside them
in the physical world we live with those
limitations in the digital world though
persuasion architectures can be built at
the scale of billions and they can
target infer understand and be deployed
at individuals one by one by figuring
out your weaknesses and they can be sent
to everyone's phone private screen so
it's not visible to us and that's
different and that's just one of the
basic things that artificial
intelligence can do now let's take an
example let's say you want to sell plane
tickets to Vegas right so in the old
world you'd think of some demographics
to target based on experience and what
you can guess you might try to advertise
to both men between the ages of 25 and
35 for people who have a high limit on
their credit card or retired couples
right that's what you
in the past with big data and machine
learning that's not how it works anymore
so to imagine that think of all the data
that Facebook has on you every status
update you ever typed every messenger
conversation every place you logged in
from all your photographs that you
uploaded there if you start typing
something and change your mind and
delete it Facebook keeps those and
analyzes them to increasingly it tries
to match you with your offline data it
also purchases a lot of data from data
brokers it could be everything from your
financial records to a good chunk of
your browsing history right in the u.s.
such data is routinely collected
collated and sold in Europe they have
tougher rules so what happens then is by
churning through all that data these
machine learning algorithms that's why
they're called learning algorithms they
learn to understand the characteristics
of people who purchase tickets to Vegas
before when they learn this from
existing data they also learn how to
apply this to new people so if they're
presented with a new person they can
classify whether that person is likely
to buy a ticket to Vegas or not fine
you're thinking an offer to buy tickets
to Vegas I can ignore that but the
problem isn't that the problem is we no
longer really understand how these
complex algorithms work we don't
understand how they're doing this
categorization it's giant matrices
thousands of rows and columns maybe
millions of rows and columns and not the
programmers and not anybody who looks at
it even if you have all the data
understand anymore how exactly it's
operating any more than you'd know what
I was thinking right now if you were
shown a cross-section of my brain it's
like we're not programming anymore we're
growing intelligence that we don't truly
understand and these things only work if
there's an enormous amount of data so
they also encourage deep surveillance on
all of us so that the machine learning
algorithm skin work that's why Facebook
months to collect all the data it can
about you the algorithms work better so
let's push that Vegas example of it what
if the system that we do not understand
was picking up that it's easier to sell
Vegas tickets to people who are bipolar
and about to enter the manic phase such
people tend to become over spenders
compulsive gamblers they could do this
and you'd have no clue that's what they
were picking up on I gave this example
to a bunch of computer scientists once
and afterwards one of them came up to me
he's troubled and he said that's why I
couldn't publish it I was like couldn't
publish what he had tried to see whether
you can indeed figure out the onset of
mania from social media posts before
clinical symptoms and it had worked and
it had worked very well and he had no
idea how it worked or what it was
picking up on now it the problem isn't
solved if he doesn't publish it because
there are already companies that are
developing this kind of technology and a
lot of the stuff is just off the shelf
this is not very difficult anymore do
you ever go on YouTube meaning to watch
one video and an hour later you watch 27
you know how YouTube has this column on
the right that says up next and it ought
to play something it's an algorithm
picking what it thinks that you might be
interested in and maybe not fine on your
own it's not a human editor it's what
algorithms do it picks up on what you
have watched and what people like you
have watched and infers that that must
be what you're interested in
what you want moral and just shows you
more sounds like a benign and useful
future except when it isn't so in 2016 I
attended rallies of van candidate Donald
Trump to study as a scholar the movement
supporting him I studied social
movements so I was studying it too and
then I wanted to write something about
one of his rallies I watch it a few
times on YouTube YouTube started
recommending to me and auto-playing to
me white supremacist videos an
increasing order of extremism if I
watched one it served up one even more
extreme and autoplay that one too if you
watch Hillary Clinton or Bernie Sanders
content YouTube recommends and autoplays
conspiracy left and it goes downhill
from there well you might be thinking
this is politics but it's not this isn't
about politics it's just the algorithm
figuring out human behavior I once
watched a video about vegetarianism on
YouTube and YouTube recommend that an or
played a video about being vegan it's
like you're never hardcore enough for
you to so what's going on now YouTube's
algorithm is proprietary but here's what
I think is going on the algorithm is
figured out that if you can entice
people into thinking that you can show
them something more hardcore they're
more likely to stay on the site watching
video after video going down that rabbit
hole while Google serves them ads now
with nobody minding the ethics of the
store
these sites can profile people who are
jus haters who think that Jews are
parasites and who have such explicit
anti-semitic content
and let you target them with that they
can also mobilize algorithms to find for
you
look-alike audiences people who do not
have such explicit anti-semitic content
on their profile but whom the algorithm
detects may be susceptible to such
messages and lets you target them with
ads - now this may sound like an
implausible example but this is real
ProPublica investigated this and found
that you can indeed do this on Facebook
and Facebook helpfully offered up
suggestions on how to broaden that
audience BuzzFeed tried it for Google
and very quickly they found you you can
do it on Google too and it wasn't even
expensive the public reporter spent
about $30 to target this category um so
last year Donald Trump's social media
manager disclosed that they were using
Facebook dark posts to demobilize people
not to persuade them but to convince
them not to vote at all and to do that
they targeted specifically for example
african-american men in key cities like
Philadelphia and I'm gonna read exactly
what he said I'm quoting they were using
quote non public posts whose viewership
the campaign controls so that only the
people we want to see it CA we model
this it will dramatically affect her
ability to turn out turn these people
out what's in those dark posts we have
no idea
Facebook won't tell us so facebook also
algorithmically arranges the posts that
your friends put on Facebook or the
pages you follow it doesn't show you
everything chronologically it puts the
order the in the way that the algorithm
thinks will entice you to stay on the
site longer now so this has a lot of
consequences you may be thinking
somebody's loving you on face
look the algorithm may never be showing
your post to them the algorithm is
prioritizing some of them and burying
the others experiments show that what
the algorithm picks to show you can
affect your emotions but that's not all
it also affects political behavior so in
2010 in the midterm elections Facebook
did experiment on 61 million people in
the u.s. that was disclosed after the
fact so some people were shown today's
election day the simpler one and some
people were shown the one with that tiny
tweak with those little thumbnails of
your friends who clicked on I voted this
simple tweak okay so the pictures were
the only change and that post shown just
once turned out an additional three
hundred and forty thousand voters in
that election according to this research
as confirmed by the voter rolls fluke no
because in 2012 they repeated the same
experiment and that time that civic
message shown just once turned out an
additional two hundred and seventy
thousand voters for reference the 2016
US presidential election was decided by
about 100,000 votes now Facebook can
also very easily infer what your
politics are even if you've never
disclosed them on the site right these
algorithms can do that quite easily what
if a platform with that kind of power
decides the turnout supporters of one
candidate over the other how would we
even know about it now we started
something from someplace seemingly
innocuous online as following us around
and we've landed someplace else as a
public and as citizens we no longer know
if we're seeing the same information or
what anybody else is seeing and without
a common basis of information little by
little
public debate is becoming impossible and
we're just at the beginning stages of
this these algorithms can quite easily
infer things like your peoples ethnicity
religious and political views
personality traits intelligence
happiness use of addictive substances
parent or separation age and genders
just from Facebook Likes these
algorithms can identify protesters even
if their faces are partially concealed
these algorithms may be able to detect
people's sexual orientation just from
their dating profile pictures now these
are probabilistic guesses so they're not
going to be hundred percent right but I
don't see the powerful resisting the
temptation to use this technologies just
because there's some false positives
which will of course create a whole
other layer of problems imagine what a
state can do with the immense amount of
data it has on its citizens China is
already using face detection technology
to identify and arrest people and here's
the tragedy we're building this
infrastructure of surveillance
authoritarianism merely to get people to
click on ads and this won't be Orwell's
authoritarianism
this isn't 1984 you know if
authoritarianism is using overt fear to
terrorize us well be scared but we'll
know it will hate it and will resist
them but if the people in power are
using these algorithms to quietly watch
us to judge us and to nudge us to
predict and
identify the troublemakers and the
rebels to deploy persuasion
architectures at scale and to manipulate
individuals one by one using their
personal individual weaknesses and
vulnerabilities and if they're doing it
at scale through our private screens so
that we don't even know what our fellow
citizens and neighbors are seeing that
authoritarianism will envelope us like a
spider's web and we may not even know
we're in it so um Facebook's market
capitalization is approaching half a
trillion dollars it's because it works
great as a persuasion architecture but
the structure of that architecture is
the same whether you're selling shoes or
whether you're selling politics the
algorithms do not know the difference
the same algorithm set loose upon us to
make us more pliable for ads are also
organizing our political personal and
social information flows and that's
what's got to change now don't get me
wrong you will use digital platforms
because they provide us with great value
I use Facebook to keep in touch with
friends and family around the world I've
written about how crucial social media
is for social movements I have studied
how these technologies can be used to
circumvent censorship around the world
but it's not that the people who run you
know Facebook or Google are maliciously
and deliberately trying to make the
country or the world more polarized and
encourage extremism I read the many
well-intentioned statements that these
people put out but it's not the intent
or the statements people in technology
make that matter its destructive
and business models they're building and
that's the core of the problem either
Facebook is a giant con of hell four
trillion dollars and ads don't work on
the site that it doesn't work as a
persuasion architecture or its power of
influence is of great concern it's
either one or the other
it's similar for Google to so what can
we do and this needs to change now I
can't offer a simple recipe because we
need to restructure the whole way our
digital technology operates everything
from the way technologies develop to the
way the incentives economic and
otherwise are built into the system we
have to face and try to deal with the
lack of transparency created by the
proprietary algorithms the structural
challenge of machine learning capacity
all this indiscriminate Atta that's
being collected about us we have a big
task in front of us we have to mobilize
our technology our creativity and yes
our politics so that we can build
artificial intelligence that supports us
in our human goals but that is also
constrained by our human values and I
understand this won't be easy we might
not even easily agree on what those
terms mean what if we take seriously how
these systems that we depend on for so
much operate I don't see how we can
postpone this conversation anymore these
structures are organizing how we
function and they're controlling what we
can and we cannot do and many of these
ad finance platforms they boast that
they're free in this context it means
that we are the product that's being
solved we need
digital economy where our data and our
attention is not for sale to the highest
bidder authoritarian or demagogue
[Music]
so to go back to that Hollywood
paraphrase we do want the prodigious
potential of artificial intelligence and
digital technology to blossom but for
that we must face is prodigious menace
open-eyed and now thank you
[Applause]
[Music]